# Pervasive computing

Intelligent houses, smart cars, self-managing street lights, communicating park
benches. Does it sound like science fiction? Not anymore, at least to the
technically inclined.

The ideas of smart distributed systems aren't new. Science fiction writers have
been exploring and regurgitating the concepts for many years - starting from
the first hard science fiction and cyberpunk novels. As you might guess, the
better part of the technology dreamed up by writers is still unattainable as
science fiction masters are known of bold ideas and infinite optimism in the
development of the human race (most of them, anyway). However, some of the
ideas are coming to life in the branch of computing science known as pervasive
or ubiquitous computing. In fact, there's another great synonym for ubiquitous
computing - everyware. A worthy companion to the likes of hardware and
software.

## Possibilities

What's so exciting about having computers everywhere? For starters, it gives an
unmatched level of control and auditing over your surroundings. Imagine being
able to know, whether the ceiling in your apartment is being flooded by your
neighbour living upstairs by the means of individual panels reports going
directly to your "Project Glass"[1] successor.

## Communication

How would such a disparate array of machines communicate with each other? The
mechanism of communication should be sufficiently compact and low on energy
consumption. It should also support automatic peer discovery and registration.
Of course, building a device with these properties is an ongoing research
endeavour, however there already exists a technology which has successfully
carved out a niche in the modern computing - RFID[3]. It has gained immense
popularity in fields of supply-chain management and logistics.

## Network Topology

Main mass of pervasive computing networks tend to be shifted to the edges
of the network as opposed to the centralized approach of standard
client-server applications.

## Hurdles

* Battery life - really small computing units need to function for a very long
  time without having to be explicitly maintained.
* Materials - ideally, units should be disposable and eco-friendly.
* Social issues - government monitoring, malicious agents, neo-luddites.

[Project Glass](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Glass)
[EPFL: Pervasive Hospital](http://lpdwww.epfl.ch/upload/documents/publications/730925564pervasivehospital_final.pdf)
[RFID in Pervasive Computing](http://m.thispervasiveday.com/documents/articles-perspectives/rfid-in-pervasive-computing.pdf)
