---
layout: post
title: Continuous Deployment @IMVU (talk)
---

A great talk on
[saucelabs](http://saucelabs.com/blog/index.php/2009/09/continuous-deployment—the-video/)
about continuous deployment by Timothy Fitz. This topic received quite a lot of
attention in the blogosphere over the last year. Many points have been made
about where this actually works and whether it's actually viable to employ such
a badass process, but the presentation actually addresses most of the issues.

There were several points made about the general development practices (lean)
which allow to use the CD process:

1. Stop everything when the line breaks, also called
[Jidoka](http://www.strategosinc.com/jidoka_1.htm) in the original lean Toyota
environment it originated from. This way all of the problems will get
addressed instantly instead of being pushed down the line.
2. No developer/QA dichotomy - developers write _all_ tests:
unit, integration and acceptance. And these tests _must_ be of the highest quality -
as far as you are concerned, they are the only safety net between your changes
to the codebase and the user experience.
However, you still need an expert in the QA side of things to pair with the
developers writing tests and guide/train them along the way.
3. The environment should be automated and optimized to the extreme. Automatic
tests at IMVU run for 6 hours. They distribute the tests over 40 machines and
take the time down to 15 minutes.
4. As we know people make mistakes - that's the human factor you cannot get rid
   of. We also know that intelligent people learn from their mistakes. It's
   pleasant to think of yourself as an intelligent person. Therefore, we should
   try to learn from our mistakes whenever possible.

   In the presenters experience, every single major technological improvement to
   the process and to the product came from thoroughly analysing the problems and
   tracing them to their causes.  You don't see that done everywhere: some
   problems are just swept under the rug, some are worked around instead of
   having their real cause being determined.
5. Start. Just start doing something. Scared by the CD idea? Start with fully
automating your CI. Don't even have the CI process? Start writing tests.

##Questions
*How does it work for safe/secure/mission critical systems?*
> Design for continuous deployment. If you're developing a _really_ mission
> critical system (atomic powerplant, anyone?) you can still deploy to a
> production-like environment constantly.

*Code coverage?*
> As we know it doesn't really show anything about the quality of
> your tests. Of course, teams having 90% coverage will _probably_ have higher
> quality than those having 10% coverage. But that's just common sense.

In my experience, increasing the coverage up to ~60% usually produces enough
confidence to actually start refactoring the scariest piecies of code. However,
I advise you to read
[this](http://googletesting.blogspot.com/2010/07/code-coverage-goal-80-and-no-less.html)
post and decide for yourself.

*General advice?*
> Fragment your product to continuously deploy on a feature basis.

Way too many projects end up as a big ball of mud. Of course, these balls have
different sizes and the mud they're composed of has different consistence, but
breaking the project up into smaller fragments is essential for
* Manageable build times
* Rapid feedback from CI suite
* Fast development process

> Some features (like integration with third party software) cannot be
> continuously deployed. Take that as a sad fact of life.

Which doesn't mean you shouldn't try deploying to a production-like environment
(same as with mission-critical systems).

##Conclusion?
Continuous deployment may or may not suite you. It may seem too scary or absurd
to employ CD given your system and your requirements, but, in my opinion, the
practices brought up in this talk are valuable and deserve to be applied even
out of the context of CD.
