---
layout: post
title: Installing Arch Linux
---

I finally got around installing a linux distro on my new notebook. After
carefully choosing the easiest and the lightest one, I chose arch. Of all
distributions arch linux has one of the best wikis available, an awesome
package manager and an active community.

The installation process is surprisingly smooth. If you still manage to get
lost (as I did) - it's very helpful to have
[this](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Official_Arch_Linux_Install_Guide)
page open on another screen. Remember what I mentioned about good
documentation?

The only caveat which made me install the distribution for the
second time was the `wireless_tools` package which isn't selected by default. I
didn't have access to ethernet, so it was either no internet or a reinstall.
Anyway, if you only have wireless available, don't forget to choose
`wireless_tools` package from `base-devel`, as you won't be able to configure
wireless without it.

##Setting up wireless
Refer to [wireless](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Wireless_Setup) or
[network](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Network_Profiles) wiki for a DHCP
setup to get network up and running.

For the impatient:

{% highlight bash %}
ifconfig wlan0 up #activate the kernel interface
iwconfig wlan0 essid "MyEssid" key 1234567890 #WEP encrypted
dhcpcd wlan0
{% endhighlight %}

Add this to `/etc/rc.conf` under the `NETWORKING`:

{% highlight bash %}
wlan0="dhcp"
INTERFACES=(wlan0)
{% endhighlight %}

##Network profiles
When you get tired of setting up connection manually every time you start up
your box (usually happens after the second boot) and think about
putting the `ifconfig` stuff in a start up script - don't do that. The standard
way to set up a network is through the `netcfg` utility/daemon. You need to set
up a profile  which will reside in `/etc/network.d` and add the net-profiles
daemon

{% highlight bash %}
DAEMONS=(syslog-ng !network hal netfs net-profiles crond pcm)
{% endhighlight %}

and the network profile name (under `NETWORKING`)

{% highlight bash %}
NETWORKS=(profile-in-rc.d/network)
{% endhighlight %}

to you `rc.conf` (note that I have disabled the `network` daemon for some reason,
not really sure why though). To be honest, I could not get `netcfg` to
successfully connect using my profile for the first week. It fixed itself after
a system update some time later.

+ If you ever need to restart network do: `/etc/rc.d/network restart`

##Setting up X
An excerpt from [xorg wiki](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Xorg):

{% highlight bash %}
pacman -S xorg
pacman -S nvidia #if you have an nvidia card
nvidia-xconfig #creates an /etc/X11/xorg.conf
pacman -S acpid
{% endhighlight %}

add `hal` and `dbus` to `DAEMONS` in `/etc/rc.conf` and you're good to go.

* For the curious: you can read about `acpid` in the [power management](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Acpid) section.
* When I tried to run X for the first time, I would get locked out and had to
hard-reboot the box. However, it wasn't really dead as I figured out later. If
you ever get into what looks like a lock out, try `ctrl+alt+F1/2/..` which will
bring up another TTY screen.

##Setting up WM
I chose xmonad ([arch wiki](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Xmonad)). The installation
process is fairly straightforward, just proceed as described in wiki.
The only problem I have encountered was the `freetype` lib which wasn't installed. Easily fixed by

{% highlight bash %}
pacman -Ss freetype && pacman -S extras/libxft
{% endhighlight %}

* If you get a blank screen and your `/var/Xorg.0.log` is empty - probably xmonad
has started without errors. It's a minimal window manager, so don't expect much
eye candy.  Use `Meta+S+Enter` to open a terminal and read a wiki from there.

* If you ever run into troubles while upgrading or installing any graphical
packages look [here](http://www.archlinux.org/news/445/).

* If you find yourself staring at your keyboard, unable to figure out what to
press in order to switch to another window/desktop or open another console -
use [this](http://haskell.org/sitewiki/images/b/b8/Xmbindings.png)
vi-style reference.

* You also might want to have a status bar. There are two competitors currently:
xmobar and dzen, latter being more feature-rich and sophisticated. That's why I
chose the former one. Its setup is straightforward as `pacman -S xmobar`
and following the xmonad guide on adding a statusbar.

* xmonad 0.9.1 has a problem with playing HTML5 video tags in full screen.

##Setting up sound
Sound is managed by [ALSA](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/ALSA). I don't
know what it is for sure, so I'll leave it to your imagination. To get it up
and running you need

    pacman -S alsa-utils
    alsaconf
    aplay  /usr/share/sounds/alsa/Front_Center.wav

If you can't hear the pleasant voice, consult the oracle.

##Setting up touchpad
See [Touchpad  Synaptics](http://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Touchpad_Synaptics). According to the wiki, you only need to

    pacman  -S xf86-input-synaptics

However, it didn't work for me without a restart.

##Applications
Arch is a lean distro, it even has it's user selected "Lean and Mean of the Year"
list of applications found [somewhere](http://bbs.archlinux.org/viewtopic.php?id=88515) in the forums
section.

##File manager
Definitely [vifm](http://vifm.sourceforge.net/). However, installing `vifm` is not as straightforward as
other packages as it isn't yet in the official arch repo (as of 2010-02-16).

To manually a build a package under arch, first you need to get the 'arch build
system' - `abs`:

    pacman -S abs

then the base-devel group:

    pacman -S base-devel

create a directory for unofficial package builds and get the package:

    mkdir ~/builds && cd ~/builds && \
    wget http://aur.archlinux.org/packages/vifm-git/vifm-git.tar.gz

build the package:

    tar -xvf vifm-git.tar.gz && cd PKGBUILD && makepkg -s

install the resulting tar:

    pacman -U [the tar.gz file built by makepkg]

Enjoy vi-like keybindings in a file manager! I never looked back, seriously.

##General Tips
* If shutdown doesn't shut down -  use `poweroff`. In my case `shutdown` didn't work, no matter what I tried: all
of the `shutdown` options, apci modes, e.t.c.  After a search through arch
forums (which resulted in zero topics matching the symptoms I've been having)
and a dozen tries I just gave up and tried the `poweroff` which worked like a
charm.

